When he considered the moment ripe, Thompson started calling them in singly
into his office. His theory which had matured into a conviction over the years in
administering Africans was: Do the unexpected. But here he met different men; men
who would not even open their mouths, men who only stared at him. After two
weeks he was driven by the men’s truculence to the edge of his patience. He went
home and cried to Margery: These men are sick.
He hoped the third week would prove different. He leaned back in his chair and
waited for the African warders to usher in the first man. Beside Thompson sat two
other officers.
‘What’s your name?’
‘Mugo.’
‘Where do you come from?’
‘Thabai.’
Thompson was relieved to find a man who at least agreed to answer questions.
This was a good beginning. If one man confessed the oath, others would follow. He
knew Thabai. He had been a District Officer in Rung’ei area twice; the last time
being when he went to replace the murdered Robson. So for a few seconds he tried
a friendly chat about Thabai: how green the landscape was, how nice and friendly
its inhabitants. Then he resumed the questioning.
‘How many oaths have you taken?’
‘None.’
This sent Thompson to his feet. He paced up and down the room. Suddenly he
faced Mugo. The man’s face seemed vaguely familiar. But then it was difficult to tell
one black face from another: they looked so much alike, masks.
‘How many oaths have you taken?’
‘None.’
‘Liar!’ he shouted, sweating.
As for Mugo, he was indifferent to his fate. He was in that state of despair when
a man perceives that all struggle is useless. You are condemned to die. Let the
sword come quickly.
One of the officers whispered something to Thompson. He studied the man’s
face for a while. Light dawned on him. He sent Mugo out of the room and carefully
dived into the man’s record.
Thereafter things went from bad to worse. Many detainees never spoke. In fact,
Mugo was the only one who consented to answer questions. But he only opened to
repeat what he had said in all the camps. Thompson, like a tick, stuck to Mugo. He
questioned him daily, perhaps because he seemed the likeliest to give in. He picked
him up for punishment. Sometimes he would have the warders whip Mugo before
the other detainees. Sometimes, in naked fury, he would snatch the whip from the
warders and apply it himself. If Mugo had cried or asked for mercy Thompson might
have relented. But now it seemed to him that all the detainees mocked and
despised him for his failure to extort a cry from Mugo.
And that was how Mugo gained prestige among the other detainees. Beyond
despair, there was no moaning; the feeling that he deserved all this numbed Mugo
to the pain. But the other detainees saw his resignation to pain in a different light; it
gave them courage; they came together and wrote a collective letter listing
complaints. Among other things they wanted to be treated as political prisoners not
criminals. Food rations should be raised. Unless these things were done, they
would go on hunger-strike. And indeed on the third day, all the detainees, to a man,
sat down on strike.
Thompson was on the edge of madness. Eliminate the vermin, he would grind
his teeth at night. He set the white officers and warders on the men. Yes —
eliminate the vermin.
But the thing that sparked off the now famous deaths, was a near-riot act that
took place on the third day of the strike. As some of the warders brought food to the
detainees, a stone was hurled at them and struck one of them on the head. They let
go the food and ran away howling murder! Riot! The detainees laughed and let fly
more stones.
What occurred next is known to the world. The men were rounded up and
locked in their cells. The now famous beating went on day and night. Eleven men
died.