Brexit could create a new ‘language’ – Euro-English
The EU may develop its own unique form of English and could swing the global balance
on American versus English spellings of words like ‘harbor’ and ‘organization’. Brexit
could lead to the development of a new form of the English language, according to a
new academic paper. Dr Marko Modiano, of Gavle University in Sweden, said there were
already signs that ‘Euro-English’ was developing its own distinct way of speaking.
And this could eventually be codified in a dictionary and taught in schools in much the
same way that American or Australian English are today, if English is retained as the
lingua franca of the European Union after the UK leaves.
The Europeans might also decide to adopt American spellings, Dr Modiano said, which
would add about 443 million people to the total population using that system. Euro-
English has already developed its own new definitions for some words based on the
‘Eurospeak’ deployed in Brussels. For example, as Dr Modiano wrote in the journal World
Englishes, eventual is now used as ‘a synonym for possible or possibly’, conditionality
means ‘conditions’ and semester is ‘used to mean six months’.
‘The use of eventual as a synonym for possible or possibly is actually showing signs of
being accepted and may, in the near future, be considered a feature of Euro-English,’
Dr Modiano said. Outside of Brussels, people are also developing their own Englishlanguage
sayings. ‘For example, phrases such as to hop over (to refrain from doing
something), to be blue-eyed (to be naïve) and to salt (to overcharge) are readily found
among the usage of people in the Nordic countries,’ Dr Modiano said.
He argued that English was likely to remain as the EU lingua franca despite suggestions
it should be ditched with no member state having it as their official language. But without
native English speakers from the UK to police its linguistic rules, Euro-English could
develop a life of its own. With the British gone, no one will be there to carry on the
work of defending the structural integrity of British English in the face of competition
from American English and other varieties of English. Euro-English could help provide
its users with a ‘sense of identity’ among other benefits which were ‘both logical and
welcome’. ‘In the act of recognising the validity of Euro-English,’ Dr Modiano wrote, ‘one
liberates continental European users of English from the tyranny of standard language
ideology.’